Hello, I'm Andrew Maine, and this is the
OpenAI podcast. Today, we're talking to
Dr. Nate Gross, head of health, and
Karan Singh
who leads health AI research at OpenAI.
We'll cover what went into training
models to handle sensitive questions,
and how it's helping clinicians,
patients, and health care systems. We
actually worked really closely with with
a group a cohort of around 250
physicians across every stage of of
generation this data. And we're starting
to see medications that have been
sitting on a shelf that all of a sudden
AI has found ways for them to have
direct value in in patient lives.
How did you find your way into health
care?
So,
what what drew me to health care
initially was health policy.
I was was very interested. This was
before the
the first Obama election. Value-based
care was first becoming a thing. I I
started studying
uh
different ways to make health care more
accessible to more people. And then
eventually went to Emory for medical
school. And and what what drew me to
that was a large public hospital, Grady
Hospital.
You know, to make sure that you're
you're taking advantage of every
clinical hour you have. So, what kind of
things were you doing?
So, I was mostly pissing off the IT
department.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh when when I was in medical school,
the newsfeed came out, the iPhone came
out, uh Twitter came out, the App Store
came out. And and so comparing
the technology that we had as doctors,
which was fax machine, clipboard, paper
binder, the beginnings of electronic
health records, to like what my friends
had or what the patients had in the
waiting room was pretty profound.
So, you come at it from the point of
view as an AI researcher. Where did your
interest in applying this to health care
come from? So, I I nerded out a lot when
I was younger about things like
philosophy of mind, and I thought a lot
about, you know, intelligence, and how
far could intelligence go, and could
machines be intelligent? Um
and um a lot of those explorations took
me towards as I was learning about AI
and starting to work on my first AI
projects, thinking a lot about the ways
in which AI could have a lot of impact
on humanity in the future. And I thought
something like I didn't I didn't predict
the future or how fast it would happen,
but I thought something like AGI would
happen within our lifetimes.
So then once once I had that conviction,
I thought a lot about, you know, what
are the ways in which I can have either
positive impact and and hopefully make
that a really large upside for humanity
or think about the ways in which we
could avoid downside. So since then in
my career I've been thinking a lot about
both sides of that coin, thinking about
that from the perspective as a safety
researcher, which is part of my
background, and then really some of that
work on safety and privacy that I was
working on previously, I started
applying it in health care and then I
started being like, "Whoa, there is a
really massive opportunity to think
about the application of this
technology, especially large language
models, in health care." And that's what
took me to transitioning to it full-time
was just the size of that opportunity
and the fact that I felt like the health
care and clinical AI world was kind of
not fully aware of that of that gap. Um
and so I just thought it was kind of a
really amazing opportunity and
responsibility to to bring us there. I
want to understand both the vision and
actually how this is going to be
implemented. So our mission at OpenAI is
to ensure that AGI benefits all of
humanity. And and health is one of the
places where I think that is not only
most achievable, um but is the clearest.
So health care today, as everyone knows,
is fragmented.
Care is missed left and right. Patients
are often left 364 days per year without
the opportunity to engage with the
organizations that have the information
centralized.
And doctors uh have extremely limited
time when they do get that chance to
engage with the patient to actually have
uh you know a a meaningful impact beyond
a simple surgery or a simple reactive
prescription. You know, the system is
more reactive than it is proactive
today.
And that leads to uh you know,
tremendous challenges in the system. It
leads to tremendous gaps in care. It
leads to you know, leaving people behind
in situations when they could be
thriving and
uh one of the reasons that I joined
OpenAI is is because
access has always been a a through-line
uh in in my life. Access to knowledge
first in medicine, then in building a a
product for uh doctors to access the
latest medical literature, and then in
supporting entrepreneurs as they were
building healthcare tools.
But
OpenAI has the type of technology that
can can do that at scale for the entire
ecosystem all at once. Help patients,
help healthcare professionals,
and uh help incredible entrepreneurs who
are building for all of the corners and
edge cases and tough challenges that
exist in in each area of the the health
market. What is the strategy here? We
know that people use chatbots all the
time now for medical questions, but it
seems like you're building and working
towards something bigger and more
comprehensive, not just for the patient
side, but the clinician side. Could you
talk about like what your goals are?
Patients are increasingly turning to
tools like ChatGPT throughout the year.
In fact,
900 million people now use ChatGPT per
week, and if you look at how many are
are doing health-related queries, it's
about one in four in a given week. So,
that's 40 million people per day.
And so, our strategy in health is as
much proactive as it is reactive in
stepping up to the responsibility uh and
and the opportunity to do good that that
comes with that strong consumer demand.
And so, uh with ChatGPT health, we have
created a a space to keep these
conversations not just secure,
but empowered. Um so, when I say secure,
of course, uh encrypted with this
essentially one-way valve protecting
your conversations. So, these extra
security layers, these protections to
make sure that we will never train on on
users' healthcare data
combined with empowerment really. Um you
know, search engines that that people
have used it before to navigate health
have amnesia. Um you know, they're
they're one-size-fits-all and uh I I
think context really matters in
healthcare. And so, um building a
a a series of of features and and
technology hooks to help patients bring
in their own context that they choose
to, so that each time they choose to
engage with AI, it's grounded in their
own context uh is is a
key reason why we've built this ChatGPT
for health foundation. So, I understand
the safeguards you put in place to keep
the data separate and to make sure that
you don't get leaked between there and
to be able to, you know, undergo uh a
very rigorous method of making sure that
your data's secure. But, when it comes
to the model itself, what comes into
training models that are capable of
working with something like healthcare?
It's kind of like the most important
thing in the world. For sure. It's a
high-stakes domain and because of the
use of that that people are doing, it's
super important that we get it right.
So, we think a lot about a few things
when we think about evaluation and
training for healthcare. And this is
actually the foundation for the work at
health at OpenAI. Um when we were first
starting to work on the health effort at
OpenAI, we were thinking a lot about the
safety and grounding motivation as an
important part of what we were doing.
And so, part of the thesis actually for
starting work on health at OpenAI was
thinking, this is an excellent way to
ground our work in safety and alignment
and provide kind of concrete incentives
and feedback loops for researchers who
think about this problem. Um so that's
like the model improvements in the
safety safety thinking here is not just
an afterthought, it's actually the the
beginning of our work here. And so where
we started really was thinking about
evaluation. So can we can we think about
the ways in which, you know, models were
already starting to become useful to
people then and there's already starting
to be this capability overhang between
what the models could do and what people
were using them for.
And so we started to navigate that
problem and think about, you know, where
do the models still have gaps today? And
And so that's where our work on
evaluation comes in.
And so we're taking a pretty
methodological
methodologically interesting approach to
that and a lot of that has reflected in
our work in Health Bench, which is this
kind of
uh realistic evaluation of conversations
between users who are either health
professionals or consumers talking to
models
and seeing measuring the performance and
safety of the models in in these
situations which are these kind of
multi-turn conversations.
And the way we worked on this is we we
actually worked really closely with with
a group a cohort of around 250
physicians
that we work with to kind of across
every stage of generation of this data
from thinking about the ways in which
you know, the areas that we would focus
in for the evaluation and the areas that
we
thought about what we're going to be
clinically relevant or impactful to the
specific, you know, what are the
specific things that are being graded in
this evaluation. So that's like a range
of things from, you know, are you
tailoring your response to a layperson
versus a more technical health
professional. Are you thinking about the
ways in which you should seek context
first before providing an initial
response?
The models used to be significantly
are much better today at kind of seeking
context when needed. Because users are
typing in, you know, much less than the
models often need to be able to provide
information that's most helpful to
>> It burns. Exactly. You know, if if a
user types in it burns, you know, how
how how do you think about the right way
to provide information? You can provide
some initial information potentially
based on a
you know, impression you might have of
what the user might be saying, but the
most helpful thing to do in that
situation and safest thing to do in that
situation is actually to ask for more
context. So, that's that's just one
example of of the many ways that we kind
of measure performance in Health Bench
and Health Bench in particular actually
measured around 49,000 different
dimensions of performance and that's
that's just an example of one possible
dimension of performance. So, this is
very multifaceted evaluation that we
built kind of in concert with this
cohort of 250 physicians over a long
period of time and it took us about a
year actually end to end to to work on
that evaluation and then release it. In
the kind of the the model
development cycle, it seems like
sometimes some company gets a bit ahead
and somebody comes up and catches up and
whatnot. I've noticed a pattern with the
OpenAI health models. They've
consistently been far ahead in Health
Bench and other evals. That's like by a
big margin.
Why is that? I I think we have a pretty
dedicated effort here in a pretty
serious effort that is cross-functional
and and kind of
um across the stack um for everything
from kind of pre-deployment evals to um
like like Health Bench to monitoring in
production traffic and thinking about
the ways in which we are ensuring safety
in in production traffic in in a
privacy-preserving way
and working with physicians across every
step of that process. And so,
to my knowledge, um OpenAI's models are
the only major models where every phase
of model training from pre-training to
to mid-training to post-training and
every step in between really integrates
health into every major stage.
Um and I think the result is that our
models are pretty good, not just on our
own benchmarks, but also the benchmarks
that people other people put together.
I'd like to add a little to uh what
Karen said about the the the model
training because I I I think when we
spend time with the healthcare
ecosystem,
that's
one of the things that is most important
to them. So,
not only were these models uh
trained in development with hundreds of
physicians who created over 5,000
conversations and 48,500 rubric criteria
through which to uh evaluate uh
AI responses and and score them and
identify ways that we could improve the
model,
uh do additional data acquisition, uh do
additional post-training, hone in on a
particular subspecialty or particular
area of the world where users were
telling us we could improve uh
health or health care in in that
specific topic.
Um but in addition uh I I think that
close proximity to physicians
really leads to calling out the the most
important parts that should be focused
on in in model development. So,
uh
you know, other places sometimes I see
how a model fared on
uh a medical school exam or board exam.
And healthcare is is not multiple
choice, you know, patients are are
coming in with a tremendous amount of
complexities and their own stories and
and nuance and context. Um and that's
presented in many different ways and and
part of the job of of working in
healthcare is being able to draw from
those disparate sources, uh draw from
experience, balance all that in your
head. And so, having a training
mechanism that
thinks about things like
when to escalate and how to escalate and
keep that always as the the top priority
or
adaptive literacy. I mean, can compare
the the one-size-fits-all handouts that
that people get when they visit the
doctor today to a model that can respond
differently when it knows you're an
oncologist versus a primary care doctor
versus a pharmacist in Kenya versus a a
a patient at the 12th-grade literacy
level or the third-grade literacy level
is extremely important for not only
making sure that um um accuracy and and
impact uh is is maximized, but also just
to make sure that everyone can maximally
participate in their own care on the
patient side. And then finally uh
uncertainty. You know, if you go back a
a year and a half ago, many of the the
mistakes people would call out about AI
models were overconfident
hallucinations. And I think in in such a
high-stakes field like health care,
one of the most important things
is that the model can be trained to
better know when it doesn't know
and say that. And in in addition,
suggest follow-up that can be dug into
either uh by the patient in a referral
to the health care system or by the
doctor if the doctor is using the model,
a test that they might run, additional
uh pathways they may go down to make
sure that uh the the patient can be led
to the the best possible outcome. We've
seen the cost of intelligence drop every
year, and it's exciting because every
year you're able to get [clears throat]
better answers, medicine, everything,
health care across the board. But what
are the challenges? What are going to be
the blockers or what are you looking at
ahead to say that, okay, we have to
solve for this? The the drop in cost
intelligence has been super exciting
here because so much of what we think
about and care about here is actually
about access. Um and so the more people
have access um to the technology, the
more the more people will benefit. And
that's why we're um uh working on
rolling out ChatGPT health more widely
to all free users.
>> Mhm. Um and
so that that's incredibly exciting.
Another thing that we think about as
researchers is like, where will the
marginal gains in intelligence compound
the most, right? And so I I think Nate
mentioned this exciting thing, which is
like there is more and more data that is
being collected that is across different
modalities. How do you think about
integrating that data across all the
different ways that people use ChatGPT
and all the different um
modalities and wearables and things like
this that people are collecting, lab
tests, things like this?
And that's one place where I think a lot
of the intelligence will compound and
we'll start to see kind of new
zero-to-one capabilities, like a model
looks at my entire history over a decade
and tells me a prediction that even a
human couldn't have because it's just
the model has a higher context size.
Um so thinking about those zero-to-one
capabilities, I think are are going to
be really cool. The other thing we keep
in mind is just like how are people
thinking about and using ChatGPT today?
Um can we can we measure that? Can we
improve that? Um and and I think we're
kind of at this this interesting point
right now. I I I call this on our team
the transition where
you know, for context, I I I bike to
work um and I bike to work, I wear my
helmet, I I I worry about cars and
things like this next to me. I just
reached the point here in SF, you know,
as in SF we have a bunch of self-driving
cars including Waymos. I just reached
the point where, you know, when I'm when
I'm biking next to a Waymo, I actually
feel safer than if I was biking next to
a human driver, right? I don't worry
about whether I'm in their blind spot or
or not or anything like this. So I feel
this protective effect by being next to
this Waymo. And I want everybody to have
this protective effect, right? I I want
everybody to have this protective effect
with with health AI. There are these
studies showing that, you know, if you
have a doctor in your family that adds a
protective effect to your health as
well. Um and I want everybody, whether
they're patient or a health
professional, to think about the ways in
which um the the like as a patient you
want to feel safer um having this. As a
health professional, you want this to be
a safety net for for the decisions that
you're making. So that's another
frontier that I think we're going to
cross in the next 6 months or so, which
is really exciting. Um this kind of
inflection point.
Um another thing that we're thinking
about is kind of like the right ways to
think around um post-deployment
monitoring of certain workflows. And and
I think a good example here um that I
would love to talk about is our AI
clinical copilot um study that we did um
with Panda Health. Um
this was a study where we worked with
these 20 or so clinics in Nairobi and
actually thought about the ways in which
we can deploy a safety net for
clinicians in that context, which is
basically um monitoring uh things that
they type into their electronic health
record, and only interrupting their flow
when um there's something
um potentially concerning that's going
on or a potential error or things like
this. What we found is that when we
deployed this to to clinicians um in the
setting, that there was actually a
statistically significant reduction in
um diagnostic and treatment errors for
the clinicians who are using this tool
versus not. And I think this is a step
in the direction of moving beyond kind
of model evaluations and even um
monitoring of the ways in which people
are thinking about using ChatGPT today
to actually like thinking about
workflows in which these technologies
can be deployed and and the right ways
to evaluate those workflows after
deployment. I think that's another
frontier that we are are really excited
about and would love to see more from
our partners. Nate, what do you think
the challenges are going to be?
I'll start with talking through some of
the the challenges that exist uh on the
professional side. So,
uh
each day uh
when healthcare professionals use AI,
they're looking for
the ability to trust what they're seeing
in the answer. And so, a lot of our
recent work has been making sure that
answers that the AI is providing are not
just grounded in what the model was
training on, but is ground are grounded
in the latest medical literature, the
latest guidelines, and sometimes the
latest guidance from their own
institution or their own region. Uh some
conditions are treated differently in
areas of different areas of the country.
Uh other times uh
different care settings have different
levels of of resources, different levels
of uh specialists and additional
services on hand, and um it can be
helpful as a uh healthcare professional
to be able to quickly navigate that and
come up with completely personalized
care plans. And so,
building connectivity within ChatGPT to
not only be uh
HIPAA-aligned and be used in these
secure environments, but also be able to
combine sensitive information with the
latest medical knowledge, uh I think is
uh a great path that we've started down
and and something that will, you know,
continue to
keep trust as the top priority between
how healthcare professionals engage with
AI.
So, I think one of the other challenges
um
is that uh
the systems themselves in healthcare are
quite siloed, both at an organization
level, but also at the tools that have
to be used within each organization.
AI thus far has been deployed on a
really a point solution basis in the
technology industry, but uh increasingly
the uh connectivity is becoming
available to connect the dots between
the hundreds of different systems, some
analog, some digital, some structured,
some unstructured, um many
decentralized, many not on the cloud, uh
being able to connect all of those
through unified AI layers to actually
make sure that um patients and
information isn't, you know, falling
through the cracks and that the
connectivity can be maximized to to
actually bring the greatest amount of of
impact. That's hard in healthcare and
it's it's certainly not something that
we can say is solved, but with many of
our our our recent products ranging from
ChatGPT for healthcare and its uh
connectivity to to apps and connectors,
to the OpenAI API for healthcare, to our
Frontier Foundation for models and
agents,
uh we think increasingly there's going
to be an opportunity to um
really accelerate what is possible
within the healthcare system and what
agents can achieve. Part of this seems
like it's very collaborative working in
the healthcare industry. And I noticed
when using the ChatGPT health app, the
first thing I did was able to put in my
records and get all of that. And it
looked like there was a lot of just
cooperation working across the sort of
ecosystem to do this. How has that come
to be? Where is this headed?
It's extremely important that um
all of the healthcare system has an
equal chance to uh
contribute and engage um nationally and
internationally uh with providing the
context that will help empower uh
patients to receive the best possible
answers from from ChatGPT. And so uh on
the electronic health record side, this
means working with the government um and
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services uh adopting national standards
for electronic health record sinking so
that patients in in just a a few taps
are able to um bring in their context in
consented ways. Um it's been able to tap
into um existing standards like like
mobile phones and the most popular
consumer health products and uh the most
popular biosensors and wearables to make
sure again in in just one or two taps,
patients are able to not only bring in
that information but but leverage it in
in thoughtful ways, in ways that may not
have been possible without the combined
uh set of data that that can exist in
this sort of ecosystem. So for instance
um
being able to uh reference your recent
exercise activity when making a uh
plan of how to spend your evening um or
being able to even do things as uh as
simple as you know, reference your
overnight sleep and and stress when your
agent is helping you set your calendar
for the next day and what tasks you may
take on first. It's it's very exciting.
You know, I have, you know, where a
smart ring, a watch, whatever, but I get
this data and all I kind of have in my
apps are rings to look at and go like,
okay, I guess it's doing something.
Being able to plug in a ChatGPT has been
fantastic cuz now I'll be able to ask
those kinds of questions. But that's
very exciting what you talk about, too,
is if you get a plan from your doctor's
suggestions, is literally say, "Hey, uh
I didn't walk enough yesterday. What
should I do today?" I've had it be
really good at menu planning. It
literally go on this menu, tell tell me
what to order, what not. And so you're
saying we're just going to get more of
that and much better.
Yeah, and that that's why our
partnerships, I believe, are are so
important because
in these instances, ChatGPT doesn't
replace the incredible technology that
our partners are building to go deep on
health insights for a particular
wearable.
But but our our surface area, our
opportunity to bring in that health
information, can now extend to the many
different ways people use
ChatGPT, such as
what they're going to cook for dinner,
or how they're going to plan their their
afternoon.
Uh
you know, sometimes I think of
two patients, and and one patient has to
navigate the health care system by
themself.
And the other patient
maybe has a spouse come with them. And
that spouse
has a clipboard and used to work as as a
health care professional and is
very attentive, if not neurotic, and can
follow up on on details, and is
connected to your personal calendar, and
and you know, the best aspects of of
that, uh
with consent for the patients that that
want to, I think, represents a
a future where we can make it easier and
easier for patients to follow care
plans, to play active
captain-like roles in in their own
health in in partnership with their
their care teams and their physicians.
And I think if we we can remove a lot of
the the friction that historically
exists between those processes, whether
it's
uh
just information not following or
there's a lot to keep track of or a lot
of old information to parse and bring
in.
Uh we can do it a tremendous amount of
of good or or we can help uh patients
themselves be
empowered to do a tremendous amount of
of good in their own care plans. And you
know as a physician that it's hard to
give as much time as you would like
because you don't always have more
patients you have to deal with than you
have hours in the day.
And it's interesting to see a kind of a
technology that has infinite time,
infinite patients to be able to do that
as a complement to that. I mean, if
there's one thing that healthcare
professionals are short on, it's time.
>> Mhm. Uh so, when we um uh think about
our our role internally at Open AI, we
we often break down
uh the work that we're doing into three
buckets.
Uh
raise the floor, so make sure that AI
and the benefits of AI are accessible to
everyone. Um and that could be patients,
that could be healthcare professionals,
and and others working in health-related
industries.
Sweep the floor,
uh which means help doctors uh and help
other health professionals
save time from the tremendous
administration uh and bureaucratic
burdens that they have every day so that
they can spend more time with their
patients. Uh and then thirdly, raise the
ceiling, you know, the the
impact that AI can have in healthcare I
I think will uh
you know, allow us to look back on this
this space in a few years and say
"Wow, we we have all accelerated
together in a way that
uh medicine is still in the in the
driver's seat, but uh is also far more
empowered than ever before." Yeah. I
don't think anybody feels like their
doctor spent too much time with them.
So, it looks like this is going to be
helpful to solve for that.
What has been your favorite aha or wow
or this is really cool moment in the
intersection of AI and healthcare?
I'll answer your question in a
non-standard way, which is I I I think
the most amazing thing to see me for me
in the last year has been
the rate of adoption of health actually
even even beyond the the ChatGPT health
product. Before we we announced the
ChatGPT health product,
um it's been one of our fastest-growing
use cases. This kind of health and
wellness questions and we we shared that
hundreds of millions of people a week
are starting to use ChatGPT for health
and wellness.
I think seeing that rapid growth,
especially, you know, coming from a
background of being motivated to work on
this problem because it felt like health
care and clinical AI world were not
super aware of the potential of LLMs in
health care and seeing how far we had
come, I I think has been a really
special moment for me.
There's no doubt that the adoption of
this technology and the and the fact
that uh it is increasingly collaborative
with with the health care system and it
is increasingly driving feedback loops
back to us to improve the models
is the most meaningful thing and the
most mission-aligned thing, but
what I also get excited about is is what
our research team is increasingly being
uh able to give back to them using that
feedback and
not only is it the capabilities of the
models,
but it's what can be unlocked once those
models are allowed to
run longer and have more context and
we're starting to see
discoveries of medications that have
been sitting on a shelf that all of a
sudden AI has found ways for them to
have meaningful and uh direct value in
in in patient lives.
It is starting to scale experiments that
uh you know, we as individuals wouldn't
have been able to juggle on our own.
Um and and that that partnership
combined with that increased capability
to finally move from being
interesting
to being useful
and
increasingly to being transformative
is I think what is the
most exciting thing for us heading into
this year. Now that you've been working
on this for some time, you've been
engaging with clinicians and talking to
people helping deploy this, what has
been some of the feedback you've seen? I
think I think the the experience of
flying to Nairobi and seeing the
clinicians using the tool and the ways
in which um we did this thing which we
call active change management where we
worked really closely with these
clinicians and uh flew to Kenya a couple
times to think about the ways that we
could deepen their workflows using the
AI tool um and make it something that
not only made sense to them but actually
became a kind of something that was um
indispensable for them. And so as we
were concluding the study um
the team was actually thinking about uh
the the team at Penda Health was
thinking about uh potentially running
another study.
Um and they actually had a lot of
hesitance around running another study
because that would have involved having
some group of clinicians using AI and
some group of clinicians not using AI.
They actually felt that it was dangerous
to have a group of clinicians not using
the AI. Um and so that's the point at
which I was like, "Wow, we we have done
something major here." I think that the
stories that we get back from our
members every day are are one of the
most meaningful parts of the job and
these are from
caregivers that are uh you know,
increasingly under strain taking care of
a family members trying to navigate
their own health at the same time.
Uh this is from uh doctors and nurses
who are truly overloaded every day and
um we can help them extend their
expertise uh and you know, compress the
the tough parts of their their day a
little bit more.
And then uh sometimes in in and this is
more rare but increasing,
it's the miracle cases. It's the the
patient who had been bouncing around the
system for years, the the unsolved
diagnosis, the
uh the emergency where information
wasn't present and suddenly being able
to step in and assist and accelerate and
bring people into the care that could
really help uh is uh
truly a privilege. It's exciting. It
it's is an amplifier and every doctor I
know wants to be able to do more for
their patients. Thank you very much.
This has been very interesting, guys.
Thank you.